



Internet Engineering Task Force                                 J. Arkko
Internet-Draft                                                  Ericsson
Updates: 4071,4371 (if approved)                           June 19, 2018
Intended status: Informational
Expires: December 21, 2018


          IETF Trust Changes to Accommodate IASA Restructuring
                       draft-arkko-iasa2-trust-00

Abstract

   The arrangements relating to administrative support for the IETF are
   underoing change within the IASA2 working group.  The planned changes
   include replacing the current IETF Administrative Oversight Committee
   (IAOC) with a board for a newly created organisation with clearly
   defined interfaces towards the Internet Society and elsewhere.
   However, changes to IAOC will have an impact in the IETF Trust as
   well.  This document describes the dependencies between the Trust and
   the IASA, and suggests path(s) forward that allow the IETF Trust to
   become independent of the IAOC changes, and continue its service to
   the IETF and others largely unchanged.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on December 21, 2018.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2018 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (https://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of



Arkko                   Expires December 21, 2018               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft           IASA 2.0 and IETF Trust               June 2018


   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
   2.  Background  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   3.  Dependencies  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
   4.  General Approach  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
   5.  Specific Changes to IETF Trust  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
     5.1.  Required Documentation Changes  . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
   6.  Transition  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
   7.  Acknowledgements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
   8.  References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
     8.1.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
     8.2.  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
   Author's Address  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8

1.  Introduction

   The arrangements relating to administrative support for the IETF
   (referred to as the "IETF Administrative Support Activity" (IASA)
   [RFC4071]) were created more than ten years ago, when the IETF
   initially took charge of its own administration.  The arrangements
   have served the IETF reasonably well, but there's been considerable
   change in the necessary tasks, in the world around us, and our own
   expectations since the creation of the IASA.  As a result, the IASA2
   working group is proceeding to redefine the structure for IETF's
   administrative support.

   As of the redefinition, the working group is planning to remove the
   IETF Administrative Oversight Committee (IAOC) and replace it with a
   board that oversees a new, formal organisation whose boundaries
   towards Internet Society (ISOC) and elsewhere are clearly defined.

   However, the IAOC's is interwtined with another IETF organisation,
   the IETF Trust ([RFC4371]), and as a result, changes to IAOC will
   also impact the IETF Trust.

   The purpose of this document is to describe those impacts, and
   suggest path(s) forward that allow the IETF Trust's role to be
   defined independently of IAOC, and continue its important service to
   the IETF and other communities otherwise unchanged.




Arkko                   Expires December 21, 2018               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft           IASA 2.0 and IETF Trust               June 2018


   The rest of this document is organised as follows.  Section 2
   describes what the IETF Trust is and how the current organisation is
   arranged.  Section 3 points out the depencies between IETF Trust and
   the rest of IASA, and how those dependencies require action in the
   context of IASA 2.0 project.  Section 4 discusses the general
   approach to these changes, i.e., minimal changes and keeping the IETF
   Trust as its own standalone entity.  Section 5 describes the specific
   changes that are needed, along with potential alternatives where they
   exist.  Finally, Section 6 discusses what needs to be done before
   these, final changes take effect.

2.  Background

   The purpose of the IETF Trust is to acquire, hold, maintain, and
   license certain existing and future intellectual property and other
   property used in connection with the administration of the IETF
   [RFC4371].

   In practical terms, when IETF contributors submit materials such as
   those intended for publication as an RFC, they grant the IETF Trust
   gets some rights [RFC5378].  The IETF Trust also manages trademarks
   and domains such as "IETF" and ietf.org.  The IETF Trust is also
   serving the broader Internet community by holding domains and
   trademark associated with IANA [RFC7979].

   The IETF Trust is a legal entity, registered in District of Columbia
   [Trust-FD].  It has a budget and is currently entirely funded by
   Internet Society.  The 2018 expenses are expected to be 65,000 USD,
   or about 1% of overall IETF expenses [Trust-Budget].  The main
   expenses relate to legal assistance and domain name and trademark
   registrations throughout the world.

   Currently, the members of the IAOC are also serving as trustees of
   the IETF Trust.  The founding documents specify persons eligible to
   become trustees as having to be then-current members of the IAOC
   [Trust-FD].  The documents also specify that if for any reason there
   are fewer than three individuals serving as trustees, then the IESG,
   or the IESG's successor as the leadership of the IETF, shall appoint
   one or more individuals to serve in a temporary capacity as
   Trustee(s) until eligible persons can be found.

   In the current system there are eight IAOC members.  They are named
   by the IETF Nominations Committee or NomCom (two members), IESG (one
   member), IAB (one member), Internet Society Board of Trustees (one
   member), along with three ex-officio members via their roles as IETF
   Chair, Internet Society CEO, or IAB Chair.





Arkko                   Expires December 21, 2018               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft           IASA 2.0 and IETF Trust               June 2018


3.  Dependencies

   The following dependencies exist:

   Trustees

      The IETF Trust depends on having IAOC members as Trustees.  A new
      arrangement for this needs to be found.

   Funding

      The IETF Trust continues to need a budget to manage its assets.
      As funding arrangements are changed in the rest of the system, it
      becomes necessary to specify how the IETF Trust is funded going
      forward, and if there's any change to the current arrangement.

   IPR Usage

      The IETF Trust needs to allow organisations to use the trademarks
      and other assets its owns.  As a new legal entity is created for
      IETF administration, it becomes necessary to authorize this new
      entity to use the assets that it needs.

4.  General Approach

   There are two basic approaches to resolving the dependencies.  One
   could imagine merging all IETF Trust functions in the new IASA
   structure and under the planned new legal entity.  This memo
   advocates a second approach where the IETF Trust is kept independent,
   but its dependencies on, for instance, IAOC members are resolved
   through other means.

   The rationale for advocating the second approach is in part to avoid
   causing too much change for the IETF Trust at a time when the IETF
   administrative structure is ongoing major change.  And, perhaps more
   importantly, the IETF Trust and other administrative IETF process are
   quite different.  While very important, the IETF Trust is a very low
   activity entity where changes, if any, are minimal and gradual.
   There are no pressing issues, and the organisation serves the broader
   Internet community than perhaps the day-to-day and more IETF
   meetings-focused other parts of IASA.

5.  Specific Changes to IETF Trust

   The memo suggests that funding for IETF Trust be centralized to come
   from the new IETF administrative support entity.  One of the goals of
   the new entity is to be better in charge of all costs and income




Arkko                   Expires December 21, 2018               [Page 4]

Internet-Draft           IASA 2.0 and IETF Trust               June 2018


   associated with the IETF, and putting the IETF Trust costs in the
   same place seems practical and reasonable.

      An alternative model would be to continue to use funding directly
      from ISOC.

   This memo also suggestes that the new IETF administrative entity be
   given rights to use the IETF domain names and trademarks, which seems
   reasonable given that the administrative entity is the one that
   administers the IETF web site anyway.

   Finally, if we want to keep the IETF Trust separate as discussed in
   Section 4, there needs to be a new way to name trustees.  At the time
   the trustees served both the IETF Trust and the IAOC, many of the
   requirements for naming a particular group of people were driven by
   the IAOC's requirements.  For the IETF Trust in the new model, some
   of those arrangements can be rethought, both in terms of the number
   and source of the trustees, as well as the desired qualifications and
   length of terms.

   Several options are possible, of course.  A newly designed naming
   process could be devised.  This memo argues for relatively limited
   change, however, largely on the basis of the IETF Trust arrangements
   generally working well, and on the relatively modest expected time
   commitments combined with the need for very careful management of the
   assets.

   As a result, this memo suggests that a smaller group of five trustees
   is sufficient, with two named from by the Nomcom, one named by the
   IESG, one named by the Internet Society Board of Trustees, and the
   IETF Chair as an ex-officio member.

   In addition, the terms for the Nomcom- and IESG-named trustees should
   be set to three years.

      Note: It does not seem necessary for the IAB Chair or the Internet
      Society CEO to be members of the IETF Trust.

   The normal IETF rules regarding recalls and other Nomcom-related
   processes continue to apply [RFC3777].

   The next section discusses what document changes are needed to make
   these changes.








Arkko                   Expires December 21, 2018               [Page 5]

Internet-Draft           IASA 2.0 and IETF Trust               June 2018


5.1.  Required Documentation Changes

   This document, if approved, will revise the current procedures
   defined in [RFC4071] and [RFC4371].

   In addition, the Trust Founding Documents need to be revised to
   specify how trustees can become eligible in the new arrangement.
   Such a revision belongs to the IETF Trust, with community review
   before making a change.

   The rights of the new IETF administrative entity with regards to IETF
   Trust copyright, trademarks, and domain names need to be formally
   acknowledged.  This also an action that belongs to the IETF Trust.

6.  Transition

   The new entity for IETF administration is being set up, and at some
   point, the IAOC will also be discontinued.  Fortunately, there's no
   pressing need to change all the components at the same time.  As
   discussed above (Section 2), the IESG holds the ability to continue
   to name trustees.  Once the changes suggested in Section 5 are in
   place, the IETF Trust will have management nominated in the usual
   manner, and the exceptional IESG process is no longer needed.

   However, the following actions do need to take place when a new
   administrative entity is created:

   o  There needs to be an agreement between the IETF and Internet
      Society that the IETF Trust shall be funded by either the Internet
      Society directly or through the new administrative entity.
      Perhaps this agreement can be a part of the operating agreement
      that is being drafted.  And as discussed above, it seems logical
      that the IETF Trust funding will be arranged through the new
      administrative entity.

   o  The new administrative entity needs to be given rights to use the
      IETF domain names and trademarks.  This is normal IETF Trust
      business and can be handled in the usual manner.

7.  Acknowledgements

   The authors would like to thank members of the earlier IASA 2.0
   design team, as well as Alissa Cooper, Ted Hardie, Andrew Sullivan,
   Brian Carpenter, Lucy Lynch, and John Levine for interesting
   discussions in this problem space.






Arkko                   Expires December 21, 2018               [Page 6]

Internet-Draft           IASA 2.0 and IETF Trust               June 2018


8.  References

8.1.  Normative References

   [RFC3777]  Galvin, J., Ed., "IAB and IESG Selection, Confirmation,
              and Recall Process: Operation of the Nominating and Recall
              Committees", RFC 3777, DOI 10.17487/RFC3777, June 2004,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc3777>.

   [RFC4071]  Austein, R., Ed. and B. Wijnen, Ed., "Structure of the
              IETF Administrative Support Activity (IASA)", BCP 101,
              RFC 4071, DOI 10.17487/RFC4071, April 2005,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc4071>.

   [RFC4371]  Carpenter, B., Ed. and L. Lynch, Ed., "BCP 101 Update for
              IPR Trust", BCP 101, RFC 4371, DOI 10.17487/RFC4371,
              January 2006, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc4371>.

8.2.  Informative References

   [I-D.hall-iasa2-struct]
              Haberman, B., Hall, J., and J. Livingood, "Proposed
              Structure of the IETF Administrative Support Activity
              (IASA), Version 2.0 (for Discussion)", draft-hall-
              iasa2-struct-04 (work in progress), June 2018.

   [RFC5378]  Bradner, S., Ed. and J. Contreras, Ed., "Rights
              Contributors Provide to the IETF Trust", BCP 78, RFC 5378,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC5378, November 2008,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc5378>.

   [RFC7979]  Lear, E., Ed. and R. Housley, Ed., "Response to the IANA
              Stewardship Transition Coordination Group (ICG) Request
              for Proposals on the IANA Protocol Parameters Registries",
              RFC 7979, DOI 10.17487/RFC7979, August 2016,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7979>.

   [Trust-Budget]
              IETF Trust, "Trust Financial Statements", January 2018
              (https://trustee.ietf.org/expenses.html).

   [Trust-FD]
              IETF Trust, "Founding Documents", February 2014
              (https://trustee.ietf.org/founding-documents.html).







Arkko                   Expires December 21, 2018               [Page 7]

Internet-Draft           IASA 2.0 and IETF Trust               June 2018


Author's Address

   Jari Arkko
   Ericsson
   Kauniainen  02700
   Finland

   Email: jari.arkko@piuha.net











































Arkko                   Expires December 21, 2018               [Page 8]
